[Transcript missing]
When it came time to put the
slides together for this year,
we looked back at what we'd done
for the last couple of years.
About two years ago,
we talked about the architecture
and a bunch of APIs.
Last year, we went through APIs again,
showed you how to write plugins
for the print dialogues.
So this year, we're going to do something
a little different.
And the agenda is basically the
topics that have spawned the most
amount of email between developers
and us to the various developer
mailing lists over the last year.
The topics that have been the
most interesting to discuss with
the developers and in-house.
Hopefully, we've got a little bit of
something for everybody.
We've got some do's
and don'ts for Carbon,
a little bit of information
about how Cocoa glues onto the
underlying printing system,
a little bit on Unix
printing in the system,
some diagnostic tools.
And we'll end up talking a little
bit about printing and color.
Before I go on,
I want to say thanks to everybody here
who has reported bugs against printing.
It has been appreciated.
It's kept us busy.
And also, thanks for all the
suggestions for improvements,
which we'll work on.
So before we get into this,
I got one slide.
Some of you may have seen before,
so hands up all those
who've seen this slide.
Well, that's very interesting because
all the printing engineers
didn't put their hands up,
so that's why we got these bugs.
So I'm going to explain to the printing
team and some of you very quickly
how the architecture is put together,
mainly so that you understand
the terminology we're going to
use in the subsequent slides.
And I was thinking of doing this
with my eyes shut because I've
done it so many times before,
but I'll probably fall off the stage.
So we'll start over on your left towards
the top where your application is
linked against the printing framework.
That's the box we call
the print job creator.
That serves up all the APIs that are
in the two main printing headers,
PM core, PM application.
PM application for the UI related APIs,
PM core for all the rest.
Those APIs let you set up what
we call the page format object
and the print settings object,
bring up the print dialogues,
and execute the print loop.
And a result of that,
you get a print job.
And the print job is that
PDF school file shown here and a
meta file we call the job ticket.
The job ticket contains most
of the settings you put in,
the user does in the print dialogue and
a bunch of other things that are needed
for processing the job downstream.
Underneath that print
job creator is a plugin,
Print Dialog Extensions.
Those are CFPlugins.
They can be written by
application developers,
by printer driver developers,
and they're written by
us in the printing team.
Underneath that print
job creator is a plugin,
Print Dialog Extensions.
Those are CFPlugins.
They can be written by
application developers,
by printer driver developers,
and they're written by
us in the printing team.
Moving across, we have the print server.
The print server is,
when you think about it,
it's the nerve center
of the printing system.
It's responsible for sending print jobs
downstream from the print job creator
and relaying status and error information
back up to the UI from the modules,
which we'll talk about in a second.
The print server is its own
process and manages all the queues.
When a job is ready to print,
PrintServer runs a process
called the Print Job Manager.
As its name implies,
it does everything that's needed
to do to get a job printed.
It runs
These modules over on the
right are in separate threads.
The first one we call the converter.
Actually,
that's a bit of an oversimplification.
The converter is a set of libraries that
do various things to do with converting
from one graphics format to another.
For example, there's a converter library
that turns PDF into raster data,
one to turn PDF into PostScript.
Converters are also used up in the
front end of the printing system
to generate the spool file itself.
So it's involved in turning Quickdraw
drawing into a PDF spool file or Quartz
2D drawing into a PDF spool file.
Next one down, the printer module.
The printer module is pretty
much the only thing that's
left of classic print drivers.
Classic print drivers used
to do everything themselves,
UI, spooling, quick draw conversion,
chooser packs, IO, everything.
Now the system is a lot more modular.
Printer modules,
basically all they have to do
these days is tell the converter
what sort of data they want,
and once they receive that data,
package it appropriately
and send it to the printer.
So in the case of a
Raster printer module,
it would tell the converter the
color space and the resolution
of the Raster data it wanted.
As it received bands from the converter,
compress them,
insert some engine control codes,
and send them off downstream.
Talking about talking to the printer,
that's where the IO modules come in.
Those are today mainly written by Apple.
We have an IO module
for Apple talk printing,
for LPR printing, for USB.
The list can go on.
We'll probably add to it.
Also third bodies can add to it.
Down at the bottom, printer browsers.
Those provide the UI for the IO modules.
They basically provide the
UI for discovering printers.
So there's one for using the MVP protocol
to discover Apple talk printers,
one that scans the USB bus
looking for printers.
And those printer browser
modules are actually loaded
by the last box on this slide,
which is print center,
which is the application that
presumably everybody's used.
The application that you use
for setting up print queues,
monitoring, and managing print jobs.
So that's the architecture in a nutshell.
The one thing I have to say is
it's a lot more modular than
whatever we used to have in
Mac OS 9 and 8 and earlier versions.
It's a lot more extensible.
And our goal is that-- hopefully
we're partially achieving that-- is
that if you're in the business of
writing printer drivers or even if
you're in the business of running
applications to do a lot of printing,
Apple's done a lot more work for
you than was the case in the past.
Okay, so back onto the agenda.
We're going to talk a little
bit about Carbon printing.
And we're going to cover both
printing from Carbon apps running
on Mac OS 8 and 9 under CarbonLib as
well as Carbon apps running on 10.
And as you're probably aware,
the printing system underneath those
two environments is very different.
That raises some issues and that's why
we need to talk about some of them here.
My first slide here is probably exactly
the same as the one I had last year,
although I didn't check.
The message is use the APIs that
take a session argument as opposed
to their counterparts which don't.
If you're familiar with the headers,
you'll see there are about 40
APIs where there's a non-session
and a session version.
It sounds a bit crazy that there's
a historical reason behind that.
Originally the non-session
APIs appeared in Mac OS X,
but now they're in Mac OS X.
So I'm going to show you how to use them.
With a parallel set of APIs which
take a session parameter.
In that way we can manage
printing within an application,
printing multiple documents concurrently.
Our favorite APIs are the session ones.
Those are the ones we'll carry forward.
If you're using the non-session ones,
we'd likely ask you to switch
over to the session ones.
What you've probably noticed in the
last year is that we've added new APIs.
They're session only.
That's one way of coercing you
into doing the right things.
Putting up here a note to
say we will deprecate the
non-session ones eventually.
Not this year, but soon.
All our sample code
uses the session APIs.
A couple of technical restrictions.
One is that when you're
running on 8 and 9,
you're limited to a single session,
and that's just because of the nature
of the underlying printing system with
the print dialogs being system modal,
for example.
So you have to check your
environment at runtime.
If you're running on 8
and 9 under CarbonLib,
limit yourself to one session.
On 10, you can have as many as you like.
Every window can have
its own print dialog,
for example.
If you are using multiple sessions,
you should be aware of the fact that the
page format and print settings objects
can be shared amongst those sessions.
Pretty much the only limitation,
but an obvious one,
is that each session can only have one
print dialog up at any particular time.
So somewhat related to that is using
sheets for your print dialogues.
You can't do this on 8 and 9,
but you can definitely do it on 10,
and we want you to do it on 10.
We want it to be the standard
user experience for printing.
Actually, not all Apple applications
do it right now,
and they should,
so hopefully that'll happen quite soon.
Obvious benefits of the dialogues
appearing as sheets is that the printing
control is always in a predictable
place relative to the document window,
and the other nice thing is that the user
can switch from one window to another,
from one application to another.
The dialogue is no longer modal to
either the application or the system.
The two APIs that are up there,
if you're running at run time,
you want to check your environment before
you start using PM session use sheets
because you can't do this thing online.
Even though you can bring up a print
dialog for each open document window,
whether or not you want to spool multiple
documents in parallel is up to you.
It can be tricky if you're a
quick draw based application.
You've got to carefully coordinate
your use of printing ports.
There's actually a limitation on
Cocoa Apps at the moment because
the spooling dialog is modal,
but we'll get rid of
that in a future release,
I'm sure.
You can print multiple documents or
spool multiple documents in parallel,
but be a little careful on that.
I mentioned that CarbonLib printing,
you don't get sheets.
Basically, you get the classic drivers,
print dialogues.
And I've got this bullied
item on several slides.
We have got sample code.
It's in the posted online documentation.
It's on the developer CD.
It's a little out of date now.
We are improving it.
Until we can get another
developer CD out,
we are actually going to
provide more sample code to DTS.
And so DTS will be able
to post this sample code,
hopefully quite soon.
Another UI related thing is how
do you extend the print dialog.
When I say print dialog,
I mean the page setup and print dialogs.
The message here is to write
these print dialog extensions.
Instead of using the old
append-dittle mechanism,
append-dittle was the way in which
you used to extend the print dialogs
back on older versions of the OS using
PM dialog init and main calls.
And it was a little kludgy.
You really had no control over how
you could lay out your controls for
whatever print-specific features you had.
What you can do with
PDEs is that you can have,
if you like, multiple panels added
to the print dialog,
or the page setup dialog for that matter.
Lay them out exactly as you like,
so it's a lot more powerful.
The only restriction is that
PDEs are only supported on 10.
A couple of things to mention
in connection with PDEs is that
You're welcome to write PDEs and
add any features you like,
but we would definitely like you to
talk to us before you start doing that.
You don't have to register
PDEs because they are plug-ins,
they use the UUID mechanism,
so they're all by definition unique.
But we'd rather you didn't write a
PDE for a feature that you know deep
down is something that Apple should do.
And if you're an application developer,
we'd rather you didn't write a
PDE for a feature that really
should belong to the printer.
And vice versa, if you're developing
printer modules for X,
we don't want you putting features
in that really should be provided by
Apple or maybe are application specific.
So you're very welcome to run your ideas
by us and we'll give you some advice.
We'll certainly tell you if we're
planning to write a PDE for a
feature that you think you need.
And we're acutely aware of
the fact that there are some
that we should write and add,
and we're working on that,
so patience is always appreciated.
I appreciate it.
I should mention in connection with
PDEs that we strongly encourage you
to think about the UI design and the
layout to follow Apple's example.
If you're a printer module,
you may be very tempted to make
your UI look exactly like your
print dialogues on Mac OS 9 or 8 or,
heaven forbid, on some other platform.
And we strongly encourage
you not to do that,
to take a step back,
look at how things look on
Mac OS X and fit in with that.
Certainly users don't want to see
any inconsistencies as they switch
between one panel and another or
between one printer and another.
So same applies to
application developers.
You might want to do something that
looks just like your application
printing extensions on 8 or 9,
but try to do the ACWA thing if you can.
And certainly we're here to
give you advice if you have
any questions about that.
Let's see.
So if you're an application developer and
you've added a panel to the print dialog,
you want to know what the
user did in that panel.
So the two routines down here
are used for that purpose.
Your plugin is going to call
PM session set data in session,
and you can use the get
call to fish that out,
and then your application mainline
code is going to know what it
needs to do in the print loop.
Again, sample code from DTS.
One small thing that's probably
worth mentioning is that you
do have a choice when you're
building your PDEs as to whether
to build them as pair form or code.
Even if you're a CFM app,
there's glue code from DTS.
So it's your choice.
It's perfectly doable.
Okay, now a plug for a few APIs that we
certainly use in our sample code.
These are not exactly taken at random,
but there are a lot of APIs in PM core,
PM application.
Some of them have rather
specialized purposes.
Others, hopefully,
are obvious why you should use them.
But there's a lot of APIs,
so it may not be obvious
which ones you should use.
Here are a few that we encourage
you to use all the time.
The first one, PM set job name CFString,
is a function you should
call to name your print job.
By default,
if you don't call this routine,
we'll get the window title and use that.
But there are applications that
don't necessarily have windows
or have multiple windows and do
strange things at print time.
So this is a great way of
providing a user-friendly,
meaningful name.
That name will be displayed by
print center in the queue window.
It'll be displayed in the print window.
The second one, PM set job name CFString,
is a function you
should use all the time.
This will be displayed as a default
file name if you're printing the disk.
We'll put it in the job title comment
in PostScript files we generate.
It's used in various other places,
so please use that routine.
PM Set Page Range is quite
a useful API as well.
You use it basically to tell our
Copies and Pages panel how to limit
the from-to fields when the user's
typing in the pages they want to print.
You can use this in connection
with another routine,
PM Set Last Page,
to prime the print dialog so
you can actually tell the user
what the first page and what the
last pages are in the document.
It prevents people typing crazy numbers
in there and then your application has
to deal with that in the print loop.
PM Session Error
You really need to use this in
your print loop and you have to
make sure that you always call it
before the begin page function.
If you do detect an
error with this routine,
don't bail immediately.
What you should do is make sure
you call the end document routine.
That allows us to clean up any memory
we've allocated and then you can
safely get out of the print loop,
just post your error
message if you need to,
and exit cleanly.
You should use PM Session Set Error
within the print loop to set your own
error codes or error conditions that
will be picked up after that page has
been processed by PM Session Error.
PM Session Set Error is the way you
register your application-specific
error conditions that you encountered
while trying to draw your pages.
Obviously,
you don't want to use it for...
[Transcript missing]
So how many people remember the original
articles called The Perils of PostScript?
Ten, eleven years old they were written.
Okay.
Written by a guy called Zizi
Zimmerman who's I think the
originator of the dog cow.
Pretty famous guy in his time.
I'm certainly not trying
to emulate what he did,
which is a lot better
than what I'm doing today,
but it's worth talking about some of the
tricky aspects of mixing PostScript with
Quick Draw when you're printing.
Historically,
every application that's had moderate
to sophisticated drawing requirements
or capabilities has had to resort
to PostScript at print time,
obviously if you're only
printing to a PostScript printer,
because Quick Draw really won't cut it.
For things like smooth shading, etc.
For a long time,
application developers have
been using PIC comments,
inserting snippets of PostScript or
huge chunks of PostScript in
their PIC spool files,
and getting to know the idiosyncrasies
of different versions of print drivers,
etc.
We recognize that the folks
who've written these sort of
applications probably got a lot of
code they need to bring over to 10.
They can't do it immediately.
We'd obviously like you
to go towards the PDF.
We have a PDF imaging model,
but in the meantime,
we do have what we call the Laser Iterate
compatibility path in printing.
So you can tell the printing system that
you want to pick with PostScript spool
file instead of a PDF spool file.
These are the two routines
you use to do that.
You call PM session,
get document format generation
to get back a list of spool
file formats that are supported.
And obviously,
you've got to call this after the
print dialog's been dismissed.
Because before that, nobody knows.
They don't know what the target printer
is and whether it's a PostScript printer.
So call it after the print
dialog's been dismissed.
You get back a list.
The list will always contain PDF as
a supported spool file format.
And maybe it's going to contain
PIC with PostScript if the target
printer's a PostScript printer.
So having discovered that,
you can then call PM session
set document format generation,
pass in PIC with PostScript as
your preferred format.
And basically, from that point on,
when you draw your
pages in the print loop,
you can use PIC.
comments, and insert your own postscript.
The sample code is already
on the developer CD.
It's not bad,
but I think we've got a better
version coming out very soon,
again through DTS.
Those are the routines you should use.
There's a routine that's in
PM Core called PM is PostScript Driver.
It might sound like it
does the same thing.
It doesn't.
It just tells you whether
the current printer,
basically it tells you whether the
current printer is LaserWrite or 8 or
whether the current printer on 8 and 9,
whether it's WDEV field is 3.
So you could use it on 8 and
9 to see if you're printing to
LaserWrite or 8 or Adobe PS,
but don't try to use it
on 10 for this purpose.
Paul Danbold
So having told the printing system you
want to generate your own PostScript,
these are the five pick comment routines
you can use to put your PostScript in.
I say be careful with PostScript.
Anybody who's doing this
stuff already knows why.
You have to be careful.
It's only designed for inserting
PostScript in page drawing
to supplement what you're
already doing with Quick Draw.
Be careful, especially be careful
about assuming existence of
resources like font resources,
etc.
The Space Hacks does still work,
but if you've got code that is
currently compatible with LaserWriter 8,
it's going to be compatible with
this method of printing on 10.
There used to be a mechanism to
send your own PostScript procedures
down with the print job.
It goes by the name of
the P-REC 103 mechanism.
It's a resource you have
in your application.
That's the way in which you get
your own PostScript into the
header or into the document page
setup sections of the print job.
You can still use P-REC 103,
but there's a much better
API and mechanism for doing it,
and that is this PM Session
Set PostScript Injection Data routine.
It's documented.
It's in PM Core today.
Basically, you provide a dictionary
of key value pairs.
The keys are tags into
the PostScript job.
The values are snippets of PostScript you
want us to insert at specific places.
It gives you fine control over
the PostScript job you generate.
You still obviously have to be
careful about what you're doing,
but it's a lot better than P-REC 103,
and you should use it if you are
forced to use the LaserWriter
8 compatibility path on 10.
A couple of disadvantages,
or obvious disadvantages,
of using all this stuff.
The first thing is that Preview,
which the Preview app we use
for previewing spool files,
can handle PDF, but we don't have a
PostScript rip in the system.
So if you're doing the
PostScript printing path on 10,
you can't preview your documents.
What's more, if you're doing this,
one day we'll support drag and
drop in Print Center and you'll
be able to drag spool files
from one print queue to another,
or documents onto queues, for example,
and you can't drag a PostScript spool
file onto a queue for a Raster printer
because we can't render PostScript.
So use this stuff if you need to,
if it's a short-term
solution for getting onto 10.
But go to... The Graphics and
Imaging Tips and Trips session
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock,
where one of my colleagues,
sitting in the front row there,
is going to tell you a lot more
about QuickDraw and Quartz 2D,
and I think you'll find the information
you get out of there really shows
you a much better way of doing
sophisticated printing on 10 than
the old QuickDraw and PostScript route.
Now for a topic that has
generated a ton of email,
a lot of bug reports.
Actually, we've put a lot of bug
fixes in CarbonLib.
The issue is how we get routines like PM,
set, get, scaling resolution,
orientation, etc.
to work accurately when you're
printing through CarbonLib on Mac OS X.
So it's difficult for us algorithmically
to figure out how to deal with
all these different print drivers,
print records.
So what we've done,
and we've been doing this
for the last year or so,
we've been encouraging printer
driver developers to help
us create this database,
which we call the PDAT database,
that's inside of CarbonLib.
It contains information that tells
us for these various settings
like copies and orientation,
the offset into the print record,
the size, bitmask to separate the
parameter from its neighbors,
and some information to handle.
So it's pretty good.
There's about 40 PDATs
in CarbonLib today.
It covers about 250-odd drivers,
but there are other drivers out there,
and you'll probably encounter them,
or your customers will encounter them,
and they'll complain, and you tell us,
and we'll talk to the driver developer,
and we'll add another PDAT.
So it's pretty good.
There's about 40 PDATs
in CarbonLib today.
It covers about 250-odd drivers,
but there are other drivers out there,
and you'll probably encounter them,
or your customers will encounter them,
and they'll complain, and you tell us,
and we'll talk to the driver developer,
and we'll add another PDAT.
And that's the way it works.
And in the meantime, code defensively.
It's just as bad as the situation
when you were printing directly
to those drivers on 8 and 9
last year or the year before.
So it's a compatibility problem.
We're working on it.
It's getting better,
but we certainly appreciate your support.
And bug reports are just
a fine way of doing it.
We use the PR general function, again,
under CarbonLib against
the classic drivers,
and for those to work reliably,
we need that driver to support
the various opcodes associated
with those functions.
If the driver doesn't
support that opcode,
the only thing we can do is
return KPM not implemented,
and you have to deal with that.
Again, it's no worse than the
situation ever was,
but the message is,
if you're printing through CarbonLib,
be careful,
because there are some drivers out there
that we don't know how to deal with.
how to handle it.
All right.
Probably going to trip
over myself on this one.
I'm going to try to talk about
some page and paper wreck issues.
So first of all, terminology.
The formatting printer is the printer
you see in the page setup dialog.
On 10,
we are gently trying to educate users
that when they format a document,
it's not necessarily going to
be printed to the same printer
that they format it for,
and it might well be printed
to a variety of printers.
So we've introduced this entry
in the pop-up called Any Printer,
which we call the generic printer.
The idea is that the user who, well,
actually the user who doesn't care.
He isn't even going to
bring this dialog up,
and they'll never see anything.
But when the page format
object is created,
we'll create it for this generic printer,
which has associated with
it a set of standard papers
and a set of safe margins.
If you go into the page setup dialog,
you can pick another printer,
one of the printers that you see
that you set up in Print Center,
and you can pick a specific paper
size supported by your printer.
And you will get,
courtesy of the printer module,
downstream.
So you can get,
courtesy of the printer module,
downstream exact margins for
that selected paper size.
But the important thing is that
whatever you format your document for
is quite separate from what happens
when you decide to print that document.
So the formatting for printer is
totally independent of the printer
entry that you see in the print dialog.
And it's a little bit of a leap of, well,
it's a change of model for some users.
But we feel... We feel that it's a
sensible step in the right direction.
So the current and the default printers,
those are only relevant in
the context of printing,
as in the print dialog.
When you bring the print
dialog up for the first time,
the printer pop-up will always contain
the name of the default printer.
The default printer is the
printer you set in Print Center.
Typically,
that's the last printer you set up.
And if you fiddle with the pop-up...
You can change the printer entry.
So you're changing, at that point,
the current printer.
So there are cases where you will format
for one printer and print to another.
And that's fine.
I mean,
we've got this nice PDF imaging model.
We can handle mapping, you know,
the document to different paper sizes.
The default behavior
right now is we clip.
But we'll provide some more functionality
to allow people to do things like scale
and center their pages on the paper.
But the main thing for people to
come to terms with is the fact that
formatting for a printer is very
different from the current printer
that you see in the print dialog.
Let's see, what else to say about that?
You can't change,
there's no programmatic way of
changing the default printer.
That is the user's decision.
The user can do that
through Print Center.
Today you can't change the
current printer through any APIs,
but we do recognize that there
are some applications that
want to do this sort of thing.
If you're writing a printer utility,
for example, you might want to do it.
So here are a couple of APIs,
PM Session Create Printer List and
PM Session Set Current Printer,
which respectively will give
you a list of the printers
that you see in Print Center.
And they will let you
change the current printer.
They're not available today.
They will be available
in some future release.
And I think if you write to
DTS in a week or so from now,
they'll be able to provide
you with some details.
Again, you can't use them today,
but if you're trying to do functionality
that requires access to the printer list,
we do have a solution for you.
The other thing I need to say,
well it's a bit of a confession really,
is that the page setup dialog
doesn't exactly work the way it's
supposed to in 10.0 or 10.0.1,
2, and 3, but we are fixing it.
I'm sure you've noticed if you
go to the page setup dialog,
pick a printer, pick a paper size,
okay the dialog,
and then come back to it later,
it doesn't appear that
the settings have stuck.
So we are very well aware
of that problem and we have,
I think it's safe to say we fixed it.
So you'll be getting those fixes,
hopefully quite soon.
A few words about paper and pages
and the first thing I have to say in
connection with these routines that
are generally used by applications that
are trying to format a document that
maybe have come from another platform
or been formatted for another printer
without using the page setup dialogue.
These routines,
you have to be very careful about
using them on 8 and 9 because there's
no programmatic way on 8 and 9 to
tell the driver what to put in,
well, to put in a document.
You can't put different R paper,
R page settings into the print
record without going through the
driver's page setup dialogue.
So the APIs are there.
Use them carefully on 8 and 9.
They do work on 10 as
advertised or as expected.
So you really do have a lot more control
over your paper and page recs on 10.
If you're going to print without a UI,
you can do that and you've
got a reasonable amount
of control over margins.
A The last bullet item here
is extremely important.
and
Before you call any of the
GET functions to get the page rec,
for example, always make sure you call
the validate call after any
set call to set orientation,
set scale, set resolution,
set paper or page rec because that's
the only time we sync everything up.
In fact, we're even fixing a few
bugs in that routine,
so we'll get it right very soon.
So that's pretty much all
I've got now for Carbon.
Just to recap, do use the session APIs,
display your print
dialogs as sheets on 10,
develop your own PDEs,
go to tomorrow morning's session,
look forward to using Quartz 2D instead
of mixing up Quickdraw and PostScript,
and program defensively when you're
running on 8 and 9 on CarbonLib.
We do our best.
Compatibility is getting better,
but be aware of some
of the issues we face.
Now we're going to switch
horses for a moment to talk a
little bit about Cocoa Printing.
What I'm not going to do...
I'd like to tell you what to do in
your application because there's
a session straight after this on
advanced Cocoa topics in Hall 2.
And there's a lot more information there,
so I encourage you to go to that
session if you're a Cocoa app
developer and want to know a bit
more about how to do printing right.
What I'm going to talk about
is the relationship between
the AppKit printing classes,
there's only four of them that
are really relevant for printing,
and the underlying printing system.
So we're just going to go through these
classes fairly quickly and I'll just try
to explain how they map to each other.
The first one, NSPrintInfo.
If you look in NSPrintInfo,
look at the online documentation
or look at the code itself,
you'll see it's a dictionary
that contains all the settings
that are usually associated with
the page setup and print dialog.
So in theory,
it maps directly to our page
format and print settings objects.
As a Cocoa application,
you automatically get a
shared NSPrintInfo object.
There's always a notion of a
current one that's used for
the current print operation.
You can create multiple instances of it.
There are accessor functions
for the various things that
are stored in NSPrintInfo,
although most of them are changed
by bringing up the dialogs,
the page setup and print dialogs.
The thing that we need to do
is we need to sync NSPrintInfo.
NSPrintInfo.
A little bit more closely with
page format and print settings
because there's a couple of things
in NSPrintInfo that aren't supported
by the underlying printing system.
We need to take care
of that and vice versa.
There's a couple of things that
we have in the underlying print
system that aren't in NSPrintInfo.
Just a few things like NSPrintInfo's
got some fax settings which we
don't carry through downstream.
The underlying printing system's
got settings for things like print
quality modes and things like that.
So we'll be syncing those two up.
NSPageLayout,
basically that's the page setup dialog.
You really don't have to do a
lot of coding with NSPageLayout.
It basically accesses and has print and
post as things like the paper size and
the scaling orientation for the document.
The one thing I want to point out is
that you can invoke it in two ways.
You can invoke it as a modal dialog
and you can invoke it as a sheet.
So you'll know which one you should do.
One thing I could have mentioned
is that you can extend the page
setup dialog in a Cocoa app,
but very few applications
have need to do that.
And it's Print Panel,
which is a print dialog, obviously.
You can do the same thing.
You can add an accessory view,
and it's sort of equivalent
to print dialog extensions
for Carbon applications.
You can add a view,
put your application in
specific print settings in it.
The only restriction today
with Cocoa apps is that you can
only have one accessory view.
I'm sure we'll work on that and enable
you to have more if you need them.
And actually,
if you need to do that sort of thing,
I think you should tell Apple,
so we understand the priority for that.
And obviously,
NS Print Panel sets the things in
NS Print Info that you see in the
dialogs like copies and page range,
etc.
Last but not least is
NS Print Operation where
all the good stuff happens.
When you pull down the file menu,
hit print,
you create an NS Print Operation that
takes a copy of NS Print Info,
brings the print dialog up,
merges the results back
into NS Print Info,
and then it's up to NS View to
do all the real work.
NS View draws all the pages,
goes into the spool file,
the PDF spool file,
and that spool file goes through
the rest of the printing system
just like any other print job,
maybe from other Cocoa apps
or from other Carbon apps.
Basically, that's it.
There's very little for you to
worry about for Cocoa printing.
There's a little bit of work for us to do
to more tightly sync the AppKit classes
up to our underlying data structures,
but it works pretty well today.
Now for the power of printing, sorry,
the power of Unix and printing.
So we don't expect a lot of consumers
to do printing from the command line,
but maybe some of you guys in this
room will want to do that occasionally.
So you can.
The LPR family is in the BST layer.
LPR works.
Just a couple of things to mention.
Today,
LPR and its associated tools like LPC,
LPQ, LPRM, etc., they work,
but they're not really well integrated
with the rest of the printing system.
In other words, or for example,
when you say LPR-P,
you want to type in your printer name,
you can't type in necessarily
any of the print queue names
that you see in Print Center.
The only exception to that is that
you can use... printer entries
that are stored in NetInfo.
So you can put NetInfo printer
entries in when you're LPR printing.
The other thing, of course,
with LPR is that you don't get
user-friendly status and error
messages if anything goes wrong.
And you're limited in the
file types you can print.
Generally, text and PostScript files work
well and others not so well.
So LPR works,
but there's actually a better tool.
And... if you haven't found it already,
it's just called the Print Tool.
It's in the user S bin.
The difference is that the
Print Tool is actually integrated
with the rest of the printing system.
So when you specify your printer,
you can specify any printer queue
name that you see in Print Center.
You can, for example,
print PDF files to raster
printers using the Print Tool.
There's an NUP flag you can use, dash N,
so you can print your files 2UP, 4UP,
etc.
So... and... and once you've printed,
you can see that your job's
in the queues along with
everything else via Print Center.
So... if you want to do
command line printing,
print is a little better
than LPR at the moment.
LPD is in the system.
Obviously,
it's used when you print through LPR.
It's not...
It's not set up by default
to enable remote printing,
but you can do that.
So if you know what you're doing,
you can edit the config files and you
can run LPD maybe from a startup script.
And other clients on the LAN can print to
your LPD spool or running on your system
to whatever printers you're set up for.
So LPD works.
It's not our long-term
solution for print sharing,
but it's there.
I mentioned a moment ago NetInfo.
Something you may not know is whenever
you set up an LP operator in PrintCenter,
we actually create a local NetInfo entry.
I'm not going to get into NetInfo
because I'm definitely not the
right person to talk about it,
but NetInfo is...
A very convenient way of making
LPR printers available to everybody
on the network without them having
to know their domain names or
IP addresses or anything like that.
But you can't use Print Center to
create global NetInfo entries or
NetInfo entries that are exported
to higher network domains.
You have to use NetInfo
Manager to do that,
and you have to be appropriately
privileged to be able to create
network-wide NetInfo things.
So you can do it.
If you're going to
create a printer entry,
the PrintCap man page tells you about
the keys that you have to put in.
You have to be careful there.
I mean, we have to know,
you have to be exactly right when you
specify the name of the printer and the
name of the machine that's running LPD,
for example.
There's one instance
there which I'm flagging.
There's a TY key, which we use,
the value associated with that,
we use to find the PPD file
for the PostScript printer.
So you can use Print Center associated
with that NetInfo entry.
And NetInfo is limited in
the bytecodes it can accept.
It doesn't like forward
slashes and spaces,
for example.
Some PPD files may have
those in the file name.
So if you're going to put
the PPD name in the entry,
you can replace those slashes
and spaces with an underscore.
So there's some subtleties there.
I'm sure DTS can handle that.
They can handle questions on it.
But it's a nice way of making
your printers available to
everybody on the network.
So it's demo time.
So is Phil Schiller here?
Oh, okay.
So I'll do the demo.
We're already running terminal.
It's going to be a very exciting demo.
So exciting that...
I think a lot of people
may want to leave now.
Alright,
so we're running top over here just
so that you can see what's going on.
Not much happening right now,
though we've got PrintCentre
running down here.
Let me say a few words
about CPL Util first of all.
It's a tool that was written
a while back when we were
developing the printing system.
It was written for Intel News originally,
but it's become quite useful for
people who are doing print testing,
people who are trying to
troubleshoot print jobs,
especially for printer driver developers.
If you're feeling brave and
you're having a printing problem,
CPL Util is a great
way of finding out if,
for example, print queues have got
corrupted in some way,
when a job fails, how far the print job
got through the pipeline.
I'm going to show you a
little bit about CPL Util,
but by no means give you a
comprehensive walkthrough.
If we go to Developer Tools,
We'll see, oops, where are we?
Oh, CD.
Of course this requires that I can type.
See a bunch of things in
there that Apple provides that
aren't in the standard BSD set,
but there's CPL Util,
so we can run CPL Util and first
off get ready for the scrolling.
We can see all the things
that CPL Util does.
We're not going to try
many of these commands,
but here's one that we can do.
ShowWorksetPrinters is a command
we can use in CPL Util to see
what print queues we've set up.
We can do this and we can see, oh,
I don't have any print queues.
So let's go to, well,
Let's get print center,
let's get CPL Util listening to all
the things that the print server does.
That'll be one way of seeing whether
operations like creating a queue or
printing a job work successfully.
So, first thing I'm going to do is,
I'm not going to trust my typing.
We're going to start the server.
Top has beautifully shown that
the print server is now running.
So now we can...
You can listen to servers.
So what we're doing now,
I mentioned earlier on that
Print Server is the nerve
center of the system.
So we're now listening on
a port to Print Server.
We're finding out
everything that happens.
If queues are created,
if jobs are printed,
if queues are deleted, etc.
So we're listening to
Print Server at this time.
What we're going to do is we are
going to run Print Center down here
and we're going to add a printer.
And I just happen to have
down here a USB printer.
It's on and hey presto, I can see it.
I can create a queue for it.
you'll see a few things happen.
And what you'll see in the
CPL util log is you'll see
that a queue has been created.
You'll see the name of the queue.
And you'll see a bunch
of other information.
This rather un-user-friendly string is
the name of the queue directory that
we've created in VAS full printing.
If you had appropriate privileges,
you could navigate down there,
go into that directory,
and you'd find a bunch of files
containing information about
the print queue and the printer,
the directories for the spool files,
et cetera.
We won't do that now.
And you don't really need to do it,
because CPL util is a much easier
way of finding out information about
the printer or the print queue.
So we'll stop listening for a moment,
and we will... We'll use
the get queue info command.
You have to type in everything
exactly as it's supposed to be,
otherwise it's not
going to be recognized.
Get Queue Info tells me a little bit
about the queue that I just created.
Let's see what we've got here.
Here we've got the URL to the printer
module associated with this queue.
Down here we've got the URL to the
IO module associated with this queue.
Further on, if I can find it,
we've got the URL to the print dialog
extension associated with this queue.
We've got the name of the queue
and a bunch of other information.
So you can,
especially if you're a driver developer,
you can use this sort of tool to make
sure everything got set up correctly.
So now let's do something a little
bit more adventurous and we'll print
a job and we'll see what can happen.
I will
I'll do listen to server again.
And okay, so we're now waiting
for something to happen.
Let's go and find a job to print.
Oops, I didn't do that.
Let's do this one.
I'll print out the other
one later if you like.
So, this is a much more
politically correct document.
So let's print it.
and we're not going to do much which
is going to print it because we're
actually seeing what CPLUtil does.
And if we're patient,
first of all if we were
down in print center,
We would see that the
document's printing.
Sitting over here watching the log,
we'll actually wait for the
print job to go through and
then we'll take a quick look.
You'll see there's basically a
sequence of messages that come through.
It's a pretty predictable sequence
and it's one way of finding out did
your job actually get through to,
was a school file created,
was a connection to the
printer successfully opened,
was the job sent to the printer,
was the connection closed, etc.
So it's one way of monitoring the
entire life cycle of a print job.
Did I mention that we were going
to work on printing performance?
Well, maybe we are printing.
Let's see.
The thing to look for when
you're looking at this,
yes, if you look at the event text field,
that's basically the thing to look for.
That tells you what sort
of event has happened.
So if you don't mind,
we'll work backwards.
If you see down here
associated with event text,
we've got the message that
the job's been deleted.
If we go back, we've got a message that
That's on the next line down.
Print job completed.
Looks pretty good.
Closing printer connection.
A few progress messages.
So it might sound strange to
go through this backwards,
but I think you get the gist of it.
Printing job.
Opening printer connection, starting job,
job created.
So that's the reverse healthy life
cycle of a successful print job.
And I know you won't believe me,
but the page did actually print.
That's CPL Util.
There's a lot of stuff in
there that I could show you.
Some of it's for some
fairly brave people.
You have to be appropriately privileged
to do some things like delete queues,
etc.
But certainly if you're a
printer driver developer,
maybe if you're an application developer,
certainly if you're a tester,
CPL Util is a tool that's available
and comes in handy sometimes.
So that's all we've got for the demo.
So if we could switch over to the slides.
[Transcript missing]
The last topic is probably
the most controversial one.
I'm talking about it this year because
it's important that we emphasize
the fact that the printing system,
the graphics system,
the color sync system,
are far more tightly integrated on
X than they ever were on Mac OS 8,
9 or its predecessors.
This is all good stuff.
I mean, it's much better to have a
tightly integrated system,
but it does have implications.
It has implications for application
developers and it has implications
for printer driver developers.
So I'll mention some of those.
First thing to talk about are the main
differences between printing on X versus
printing on earlier versions of the OS.
First bullet item,
applications can print in
or can draw their pages.
Obviously a lot of Carbon applications
are going to be drawing
with QuickDraw and RGB,
but Cocoa apps can use any
of the PDF color spaces.
Things can be drawn in device colors,
device gray, RGB,
etc., and in device independent, CIE,
color spaces.
So it's no longer a safe assumption
if you're a printer driver
developer that the source material
is going to be drawn in RGB.
Another thing that's different is
that everything that goes into the
PDF spool file is automatically tagged.
Obviously it's nicer if
the application does this,
but if the application doesn't do it,
we'll make sure that every shape
in the spool file gets a profile
and gets a rendering intent.
If the application hasn't done it for us,
everything gets a system profile,
images automatically get perceptual,
everything else, line art and text,
gets relative colorimetric.
So the PDF spool file,
everything has a source profile.
That is definitely different
from the way things typically
worked on Mac OS 8 and 9.
I should emphasize the
fact that this is all,
we're talking about source profiles here.
We've got quite a nice,
clean dividing line between
what happens in spooling,
which is the domain of the graphics
system and the application,
Paul Danbold and what
happens at rendering time,
which is obviously the
domain of the application.
So we're talking about the domain of
the graphics system and printer drivers.
Printer drivers don't get to control the
tagging of anything with source profiles,
and they certainly don't get
to control rendering intents.
So in print drivers on 10,
you won't see color panels
offering rendering intent options.
That's all handled upstream
when the spool file is created.
It also falls out from this that
obviously we want good color
sync profiles in the system,
not just for printers, for displays,
scanners, any sort of input device.
So obviously everything's going to
work just fine if there's accurate and
versatile profiles for all the devices
involved in the printing pipeline.
And obviously printers need to have
profiles and we obviously work with
the printer vendors to encourage them
to develop good quality profiles.
The printer modules down at the back
end actually provide their profiles.
When the queue is created we ask
the printer module to tell us
about the destination profile.
I'll talk a little bit more
about that on the next slide.
The final bullet item sounds a
little controversial to some folks.
Basically,
no way to turn off color matching.
It's a simplification.
Basically,
there's only one scenario in which
color values are not changed,
and that's when the source and the
destination profiles are identical.
In all other cases,
if the application is drawing in a
different color space from the one
specified by the printer module,
we have to match.
The color sync CMM gets in
there and does its thing.
Typically,
If everybody's doing the right thing,
if everything's being tagged,
there's a good chance that color
data will be managed through the
printing system and printer modules
will get data that's been matched.
Once it's matched, once PDF is rendered,
shape-specific information is lost.
So there are implications for printer
drivers in connection with that.
So let's talk about raster
printing for a moment.
So although everything
gets color matched,
it's not to say the printer
drivers don't have a lot to do
with final print quality output,
color fidelity.
There's a couple of
things they can do here.
First one,
there's an image access callback.
It's probably not as
powerful as it needs to be,
and we'll be working on it.
But basically,
this is a callback that enables
printer modules to get at image data,
sampled image data, before it's rendered.
So they get an opportunity
to do edge enhancement,
resample images,
color balance adjustment, whatever,
if they need to do that
and want to do that,
before the PDF page is rendered.
To make this system shine and to
make it just a great color platform,
we want every printer driver
developer to provide accurate,
versatile profiles.
And it's most important, of course,
that they cover all the permutations
of all the media types that
are supported by the printer,
all the print quality modes.
It's recommended that those profiles
include profile connection space tags so
we can optimize the number of transitions
or transformations that happen when
we're doing our color matching.
So it's very important that
we get good quality profiles
for all the printers on 10.
Now remember I said that
there is a scenario where
data can go through unmatched.
In that case, a printer module could
apply its own color science.
There's really two options
for printer modules.
When they tell the converter
what sort of data they want,
they can omit a profile reference,
in which case we have
to make an assumption.
That assumption is that the destination
profile is a system profile,
and if it matches the source profile,
we'll do nothing,
but otherwise we'll render to
the system profile's color space.
That's not great because system
profile generally doesn't have
different conversion mechanisms,
or generally has the same
conversion mechanism for
different rendering intents,
but that...
The printer module could get data
rendered to the system profile and
then apply its own color science.
Better than that, actually,
is for the printer module to
give us a profile that represents
a wide gamut color space.
We will render to that space and
from that point on the printer module
could provide or could execute its
own proprietary table-based color
matching to the printer device.
Generally speaking,
to enable vendor-specific color matching,
we'd recommend that the printer
module provides this wide gamut
profile as a destination space.
This is a fairly complicated topic.
I'm certainly only sort of...
touching the surface of it.
We are working on a tech
note and hopefully in
will have an eTech note out
that explains color matching
on X with respect to printing.
I need to mention PostScript quickly.
The simple way of saying this is that
Color PostScript printing is
handled on 10 exactly the way it
was with LaserWriter 8 on 8 and
9 if you pick PostScript matching
and the printer's default.
Because what we do is we turn all
the source profiles in the PDF spool
file into color space invocations,
send them down in the
print job to the printer,
use the printer's own embedded
color rendering dictionary
as a destination color space,
and let the PostScript machinery
do the color matching.
We will probably, in a future release,
allow host-based printer profiles to
be converted to color spaces and sent
down to the printer so we don't have
to use the printer's own CRD in the
case where you've got a calibrated.
profile.
That's for the future.
And that is all I have to
say about printing in color.
Just quickly,
the three follow-on sessions
that we'd like you to go to.
After this, if you're a Cocoa person,
go to the Advanced Cocoa Topics session.
Tomorrow morning,
David is wandering around there.
He's going to tell you all
about how QuickDraw and Quartz
2D is going to come together.
That's that.
If you've recovered from the
beer bash tonight in time,
get up and go to the 9 a.m.
session.
And last but not least,
there's a feedback forum
tomorrow afternoon for,
I guess,
all your questions about graphics, color,
printing, and related technologies.
And with that,
I'm going to hand you back to Travis.
Thank you, Paul.
Okay, what I want to do is give
you my contact information.
We obviously hit you with a lot
of information in today's session.
If you have any further questions,
feel free to email me
at travisb at apple.com.
This extends for both printing
and any of the 2D graphic
technologies that are in Mac OS X.